# Basic simulation / run folder

The `BasicSimulation` class is just a wrapper which makes managing the simulation easier.
Essentially, it is a super complicated way to write 4 lines of ns-3 C++ code:

```
ns3::RngSeedManager::SetSeed(simulation_seed);
Simulator::Stop(NanoSeconds(simulation_end_time_ns));
Simulator::Run();
Simulator::Destroy();
```

However, it offers a lot of (often needed) experiment functionality out-of-the-box.
It allows you to read and manage a configuration file. It keeps track of time and shows
progress. It does a two-phase writing in a file called 'finished.txt' ("No" at the start,
"Yes" after the run) to be able to verify that the run finished successfully. It also supports
a way to integrate distributed simulation a bit easier.

It encompasses the following files:

* **BasicSimulation:** `model/core/basic-simulation.cc/h`

  Basic simulation class.
  
* **Experiment utilities:** `model/core/exp-util.cc/h`

  A couple of handy parsing and experiment tools

Beyond this basic functionality, the basic simulation is very modularized such that
you can add only what you want. The basic-sim module as a whole is divided into two
sub-modules: `core` and `apps`. `core` is the framework, including an improved routing
implementation (called 'arbiter routing') and topology management. `apps` is about
applications to run -- either inside or outside of this framework. One can simply take
the apps and use them somewhere else without even having to deal with the framework.


## Run folder

The run folder must contain the input of a simulation. The basic simulation is centered around it.

The structure is as follows:

```
run_folder
|-- config_ns3.properties
|-- ... (other optional files, e.g., topology.properties, tcp_flow_schedule.csv, ...)
```

And after the run a `logs_ns3` folder is generated:
```
run_folder
|-- (...) same as above, untouched
|-- logs_ns3
    |-- finished.txt
    |-- timing_results.txt
    |-- timing_results.csv
```


## Configuration: config_ns3.properties

General properties of the simulation. The following MUST always be defined:

* `simulation_end_time_ns`
  - **Description:** How long to run the simulation in simulation time
  - **Value type:** positive integer (ns)
* `simulation_seed`
  - **Description:** If there is randomness present in the simulation, this guarantees
    reproducibility (exactly the same outcome) if the seed is the same.
  - **Value type:** positive integer

The following MAY be defined in order to enabled a distributed computation:

* `enable_distributed`
  - **Description:** true iff distributed computation should be enabled 
  - **Value type:** boolean: `true` or `false`
* `distributed_simulator_implementation_type`
  - **Description:** type of distributed simulator internal mechanism
  - **Value types:**
    - `default`
    - `nullmsg`
* `distributed_systems_count`
  - **Description:** How many parallel logical processes
  - **Value type:** integer; must match mpirun's `-np` argument
* `distributed_node_system_id_assignment`
  - **Description:** For each node which is defined just before the run call, 
    its assigned system id
  - **Value type:** a list `list(a, b, c, ...)` with as many items as there are nodes
  - **Example:**
    - `list(0, 1, 0, 0, 1)` to assign 5 nodes to two systems

Besides these, one can define any configuration properties they want.
However, if a property is defined, it MUST be retrieved during the run. Of course,
this is not a fool-proof safeguard as there is no guarantee it is actually applied,
but it is a useful sanity check.


## Log files: logs_ns3

There are always two log files guaranteed generated by the run in the `logs_ns3` folder within the run folder:

#### `finished.txt`

- **Description:** describes whether the run has been finished (meaning, the simulation was finalized).
  If it is not finished (not `Yes`) then the logs are incomplete and should not be parsed.
- **Distributed filename:** `system_[X]_finished.txt`
- **Format:** either only `Yes` if the run has finished or `No` if not
  
#### `timing_results.txt`

- **Description:** Contains the timing moments overview in human-readable format.
- **Distributed filename:** `system_[X]_timing_results.txt`
- **Format:** None. Use the CSV equivalent for processing logs automatically.

#### `timing_results.csv`

- **Description:** Contains the timing moments overview.
- **Distributed filename:** `system_[X]_timing_results.csv`
- **Format:**
  ```
  <activity description>,<duration in nanoseconds>
  ```
  For example, the main one is `Run simulation,<duration in nanoseconds>`.
