# Run folder

The run folder must contain the input of a simulation. It is the basis of every basic simulation.

**config_ns3.properties**

General properties of the simulation. The following MUST always be defined:

* `filename_topology` : Topology filename (relative to run folder)
* `simulation_end_time_ns` : How long to run the simulation in simulation time (ns)
* `simulation_seed` : If there is randomness present in the simulation, this guarantees reproducibility (exactly the same outcome) if the seed is the same
* `link_data_rate_megabit_per_s` : Data rate set for all links (Mbit/s)
* `link_delay_ns` : Propagation delay set for all links (ns)
* `link_max_queue_size_pkts` : Maximum queue size for all links (no. of packets)
* `disable_qdisc_endpoint_tors_xor_servers` : Whether to disable the traffic control queueing discipline at the endpoint nodes (if there are servers, servers, else those are the ToRs) (boolean: true/false)
* `disable_qdisc_non_endpoint_switches` : Whether to disable the traffic control queueing discipline at non-endpoint nodes (if there are servers, all switches incl. ToRs, else all switches excl. ToRs) (boolean: true/false)

**topology.properties**

The topological layout of the network. Please see the examples to understand each property. Besides it just defining a graph, the following rules apply:

* If there are servers defined, they can only have edges to a ToR.
* There is only a semantic difference between switches, switches which are ToRs and servers. If there are servers, only servers should be valid endpoints for applications. If there are no servers, ToRs should be valid endpoints instead.

**The log files**

There are is always one log file guaranteed generated by the run in the `logs_ns3` folder within the run folder:

* `finished.txt` : Contains "Yes" if the run has finished, "No" if not.
